A 38-year-old man presented with a seven month history of progressively worsening bilateral knees pain with associated swelling. The pain was present when the patient was at rest, and worsened when the legs was bearing weight, thus restricting his walking to short distances. His knees had become increasingly swollen. He was otherwise fit and well. His medical history was unremarkable and he was only taking a paracetamol, codeine and anti-inflammatory drugs for the pain.
Upon examination, the patient was seen to have visibly swollen popliteal fossa and marked quadriceps wasting of his right lower limb. On palpation, the masses was hard, mobile, well defined, and measured 0.5 - 04 cm. The swelling was non-tender and there were no associated skin changes. He could fully extend his knee, but flexion was restricted to only 110 degrees. There was a McMurray test proved equivocal and no ligamentous instability. An examination of the patient’s hip revealed no abnormality.
A plain radiograph of the patient’s knees revealed multiple calcific densities within the soft tissues surrounding it on the right one. Although some of these appeared to lie within the capsule, the majority appeared to be outside of it, and a solitary image on the left knee. These appearances were thought to be consistent with idiopathic tumoral calcinosis. However, to further scrutinize these calcifications, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was recommended. It showed an extensive thickening of the patient’s synovium, multiple intraarticular calcific and ossific loose bodies, and large calcified bursal extensions. These findings were thought to be consistent with very extensive bilateral synovial chondromatosis. The patient’s blood tests were normal: C-reactive protein 5 mg/l and the phosphate calcium balance without errors.
A two-stage procedure was planned following the findings of the MRI scan. The first stage was arthroscopy, which was able to note Grade IV osteoarthritis alongside florid synovial chondromatosis in the lateral compartment of the right knee. There were multiple loose bodies within this compartment and nodules were fixed to the synovium. On the left one, we found an isolated synovial metaplasia in the subvastus quadriceps-sparing. A synovectomy with debridement and excision of these bodies was thus performed.
The second stage involved an open exploration of the patient’s popliteal fossa. Multiple calcified masses were found, all enclosed in bursal sacs. They were lateral to the semimembranosus at the level of the oblique popliteal ligament. All the masses were excised. A histological review confirmed our diagnosis of synovial chondromatosis. The sections showed nests of chondrocytes with focal ossification and focally attenuated synovium overlying the nodules. After the operation, the patient underwent functional rehabilitation sessions focusing on quadriceps strengthening, with a daily exercise regime to supplement this. He recovered well and ten weeks after the operation, has regained his right knee’s full range of movement with flexion increased to 130 degrees, which is equal to that of his left knee.